SPEC.md, before:

Onya Model Specification

# Overview

Onya is a knowledge graph framework with a simple, recursive model for representing structured information. The core model is intentionally minimal—just nodes, edges, and properties, identifiable by IRIs.

# Core Concepts

## Graph

Collection of nodes managed together. Provides the top-level container for the Onya model.

## Node

Fundamental unit of information in Onya. Each node has:

- **id**: An identifier expressed as an IRI
- **types**: A set of IRIs that classify the node
- **assertions**: A set of edges and properties

Nodes use **sets** (not sequences) for assertions because pervasive ordering is not a core requirement of the model. Other layers can add ordering as needed.

## Assertions

Edges and properties are collectively called **assertions**. Each assertion is in effect an anonymous node defined by the combination of:
- its origin (a node or another assertion)
- its label (an IRI)
- an internal marker or tracker to differentiate between other, similar assertions

### Edge

An **edge** connects an origin to a target node via an IRI label.

```
origin --[IRI label]--> target node
```

### Property

A **property** connects an origin to a string value via an IRI label.

```
origin --[IRI label]--> "string value"
```

# Example

A mother can have multiple children. In Onya, each parental relationship can be modeled with an edge from the node representing the mother (the assertion's origin) to the node representing the child (the assertion's target). Each of these edges is a separate, anaonymous node which can have its own assertions, e.g. date of labor (though of course another modeler could choose to model this instead just using a date of birth edge on each child node).

# Notes

## String Properties

Properties in Onya always have string values. There are no numbers, dates, or other types at the core layer. Annotation systems can be built on top to add typing semantics.

## Recursive Structure

A key feature of Onya is that **assertions themselves can be origins for further assertions**. This natural recursiveness means:

- An edge can have properties and edges
- A property can have properties and edges
- There's no separate concept of "attributes" - just recursive assertions

This enables representation of:
- Metadata about relationships (e.g., a marriage with a date and location)
- Qualified values (e.g., a temperature with units and measurement method)
- N-ary relationships (e.g., a sale with buyer, seller, item, and price)

## IRIs Throughout

All identifiers in Onya are IRIs:
- Node IDs
- Node types
- Edge labels
- Property labels

This provides a uniform, standard way to identify and dereference all elements of the graph.

# Onya Literate Serialization

The human-friendly Onya Literate format is based on Markdown, making it easy to read and write knowledge graphs.

### File Structure

An Onya Literate file contains:

1. **Document Header** - metadata about the document itself
2. **Node Blocks** - definitions of nodes and their assertions

## Comments

Comments use HTML comment syntax:

```
<!-- This is a comment -->
```

These are ignored by the parser and do not appear in the graph in any way. They will also be ignored by most markdown processors.

## Document Header

```
# @docheader

* @document: http://example.org/doc
* title: Example Document
* @nodebase: http://example.org/
* @schema: https://schema.org/
* @language: en
```

The document header specifies:
- `@document`: IRI of the document itself
- `@nodebase`: Base IRI for resolving relative node IDs, whether as origins or edge targets; if omitted, `@document` is used as the node base
- `@schema`: Base IRI for schema vocabulary (types, property/edge labels)
- `@language`: Default language for string values
- Other assertions are attached to the document node

## Node Blocks

Each node block defines a node:

```
# NodeID [Type]

* label: value
<!-- Additional assertions -->
```

Structure:
- Header: `# NodeID [OptionalType]`
  - `NodeID` is resolved relative to `@nodebase` (or `@document` if `@nodebase` is not set)
  - `Type` is resolved relative to `@schema`
- Assertions: list items starting with `*`
  - `label: value` - property (label is IRI, value is string)
  - `label -> TargetID` - edge (label is IRI, TargetID is node ID)
- Indentation indicates nested assertions

## Example: Things Fall Apart

```
# @docheader

* @document: http://example.org/classics/things-fall-apart
* title: Things Fall Apart knowledgebase
* @nodebase: http://example.org/classics/
* @schema: https://schema.org/
* @language: en

# TFA [Book]

* name: Things Fall Apart
* alternateName: TFA
* isbn: 9781841593272
* datePublished: 1958-06
* bookFormat -> Paperback
* author -> CAchebe
* publisher -> Heinemann

# CAchebe [Person]

* name: Chinua Achebe
* birthDate: 1930-11-16
* birthPlace -> Ogidi
* jobTitle: Novelist

# Heinemann [Organization]

* name: William Heinemann Ltd.
* foundingDate: 1930
* foundingLocation -> London
  * country -> UK
```

## Recursive Assertions Example

Assertions can have nested assertions:

```
# Boston [City]

* name: Boston
  * stateCode: MA
  * country -> USA

Keys to demonstrate qualified values:
* temperature: 25
  * unit: Celsius
  * measurementMethod -> InfraredThermometer
```

In the second example, the `temperature` property has two nested assertions:
- A property `unit` with value "Celsius"
- An edge `measurementMethod` pointing to an `InfraredThermometer` node

## Explicit IRIs

You can use explicit IRIs with angle brackets:

```
* <https://schema.org/name>: Chinua Achebe
```

## Quoted Values

String values can be explicitly quoted:

```
* name: "Things Fall Apart"
* description: "A novel about pre-colonial Igbo society"
```

Use quotes when values contain special characters or when you want to explicitly mark something as a string.

## Long Text Blocks

Onya Literate supports two mechanisms for handling long text blocks as property values:

### 1. Markdown Indented Text

Use Markdown's standard mechanism for multi-line list items. After the initial property line, add blank lines followed by indented paragraphs (4+ spaces) to continue the text within the same bullet point:

```
# CAchebe [Person]

* name: Chinua Achebe
* bio: Chinua Achebe (1930–2013) was a Nigerian writer considered a founder of modern African literature.

    Known for his novel Things Fall Apart and for writing about African life from an African perspective, his work focused on the effects of colonialism, political corruption, and the clash between traditional and Western values.

    After the Nigerian Civil War, he became an English professor in the United States before returning to Nigeria to continue his academic and writing career.
* birthDate: 1930-11-16
```

The indented paragraphs are treated as part of the same property value, with newlines preserved.

### 2. Text References

For longer text blocks or when you want to define text content separately from its usage, use text references with Python-style triple quotes:

```
# CAchebe [Person]

* name: Chinua Achebe
* bio:: achebe-bio  <!-- The double colon marks it as a text reference -->
* birthDate: 1930-11-16

:achebe-bio = """Chinua Achebe (1930–2013) was a Nigerian writer considered a founder of modern African literature, known for his novel Things Fall Apart and for writing about African life from an African perspective.

His work focused on the effects of colonialism, political corruption, and the clash between traditional and Western values, with works like Things Fall Apart and the "African Trilogy" exploring the Igbo experience. After the Nigerian Civil War, he became an English professor in the United States before returning to Nigeria to continue his academic and writing career.
"""
```

Text references:
- Use `::` after the property label to indicate a text reference
- Define the text content with `:reference-name = """content"""`
- Text references can be defined anywhere in the document, not necessarily before their usage
- Triple-quoted content preserves all whitespace and newlines exactly as written

## Optional assertion provenance (`@source`)

Some workflows want document-level provenance without making it part of the core model. The parser can optionally tag **every created assertion** (including nested assertions but excluding document header declarations) with a sub-property:

- `@source`: the `@document` IRI of the source document

Parsers will generally turn this **off by default** to avoid graph bloat.

## Model Summary

```
Graph
  └── Node (identified by IRI)
      ├── types: set[IRI]
      ├── properties: set[Property]
      └── edges: set[Edge]
      
Property (anonymous node: origin + label)
  ├── origin: Node | Property | Edge
  ├── label: IRI
  ├── value: str
  ├── properties: set[Property]
  └── edges: set[Edge]

Edge (anonymous node: origin + label)  
  ├── origin: Node | Property | Edge
  ├── label: IRI
  ├── target: Node
  ├── properties: set[Property]
  └── edges: set[Edge]
```

# Design Principles

1. **Simplicity**: Core model uses only nodes, edges, and properties
2. **IRI-based**: All identifiers are IRIs for global uniqueness
3. **String values only**: Keep the core model simple; add typing in layers above
4. **No pervasive ordering**: Use sets for assertions; ordering can be added when needed
5. **Recursive assertions**: Edges and properties are first-class, can have their own assertions
6. **Graph, not model**: The container is a "graph", elements within use "assertions" terminology

# Relationship to Other Models

Onya is similar to RDF but simpler:
- Similar: IRIs, triples (s-p-o), reification via recursive structure
- Simpler: No literals beyond strings, no blank nodes, uniform treatment of properties/edges
- Different: All assertions are "anonymous nodes", properties are always strings

The recursive assertion model is reminiscent of property graphs but more uniform:
- Similar: Nodes and edges both can have properties
- Different: Properties can also have edges, all via the same mechanism

Commit message:

`@typebase` preferred to `@type-base` and clarity updates

SPEC.md, after:

Onya Model Specification

# Overview

Onya is a knowledge graph framework with a simple, recursive model for representing structured information. The core model is intentionally minimal—just nodes, edges, and properties, identifiable by IRIs.

# Core Concepts

## Graph

Collection of nodes managed together. Provides the top-level container for the Onya model.

## Node

Fundamental unit of information in Onya. Each node has:

- **id**: An identifier expressed as an IRI
- **types**: A set of IRIs that classify the node
- **assertions**: A set of edges and properties

Nodes use **sets** (not sequences) for assertions because pervasive ordering is not a core requirement of the model. Other layers can add ordering as needed.

## Assertions

Edges and properties are collectively called **assertions**. Each assertion is in effect an anonymous node defined by the combination of:
- its origin (a node or another assertion)
- its label (an IRI)
- an internal marker or tracker to differentiate between other, similar assertions

### Edge

An **edge** connects an origin to a target node via an IRI label.

```
origin --[IRI label]--> target node
```

### Property

A **property** connects an origin to a string value via an IRI label.

```
origin --[IRI label]--> "string value"
```

# Example

A mother can have multiple children. In Onya, each parental relationship can be modeled with an edge from the node representing the mother (the assertion's origin) to the node representing the child (the assertion's target). Each of these edges is a separate, anaonymous node which can have its own assertions, e.g. date of labor (though of course another modeler could choose to model this instead just using a date of birth edge on each child node).

# Notes

## String Properties

Properties in Onya always have string values. There are no numbers, dates, or other types at the core layer. Annotation systems can be built on top to add typing semantics.

## Recursive Structure

A key feature of Onya is that **assertions themselves can be origins for further assertions**. This natural recursiveness means:

- An edge can have properties and edges
- A property can have properties and edges
- There's no separate concept of "attributes" - just recursive assertions

This enables representation of:
- Metadata about relationships (e.g., a marriage with a date and location)
- Qualified values (e.g., a temperature with units and measurement method)
- N-ary relationships (e.g., a sale with buyer, seller, item, and price)

## IRIs Throughout

All identifiers in Onya are IRIs:
- Node IDs
- Node types
- Edge labels
- Property labels

This provides a uniform, standard way to identify and dereference all elements of the graph.

# Onya Literate Serialization

The human-friendly Onya Literate format is based on Markdown, making it easy to read and write knowledge graphs.

### File Structure

An Onya Literate file contains:

1. **Document Header** - metadata about the document itself
2. **Node Blocks** - definitions of nodes and their assertions

## Comments

Comments use HTML comment syntax:

```
<!-- This is a comment -->
```

These are ignored by the parser and do not appear in the graph in any way. They will also be ignored by most markdown processors.

## Document Header

```
# @docheader

* @document: http://example.org/doc
* title: Example Document
* @nodebase: http://example.org/
* @schema: https://schema.org/
* @language: en
```

The document header specifies:
- `@document`: IRI of the document itself (required)
- `@nodebase`: Base IRI for resolving relative node IDs, whether as origins or edge targets; if omitted, `@document` is used as the node base
- `@schema`: Base IRI for schema vocabulary—used to expand both property/edge labels AND types (required in nearly all cases)
- `@typebase`: Base IRI for resolving relative type IRIs; only needed in less common cases where types use a different base than properties. If omitted, types use `@schema` as the base.
- `@language`: Default language for string values
- Other assertions are attached to the document node

**Important**: The `@nodebase` directive is used exclusively for expanding node IDs (e.g., `Chuks` → `http://example.org/people/Chuks`). The `@schema` directive is used for expanding both property labels (e.g., `name` → `https://schema.org/name`) and types (e.g., `[Person]` → `https://schema.org/Person`). It should be extremely unusual for an Onya file not to have a `@schema` directive.

## Node Blocks

Each node block defines a node:

```
# NodeID [Type]

* label: value
<!-- Additional assertions -->
```

Structure:
- Header: `# NodeID [OptionalType]`
  - `NodeID` is resolved relative to `@nodebase` (or `@document` if `@nodebase` is not set)
  - `Type` is resolved relative to `@schema`
- Assertions: list items starting with `*`
  - `label: value` - property (label is IRI, value is string)
  - `label -> TargetID` - edge (label is IRI, TargetID is node ID)
- Indentation indicates nested assertions

## Example: Things Fall Apart

```
# @docheader

* @document: http://example.org/classics/things-fall-apart
* title: Things Fall Apart knowledgebase
* @nodebase: http://example.org/classics/
* @schema: https://schema.org/
* @language: en

# TFA [Book]

* name: Things Fall Apart
* alternateName: TFA
* isbn: 9781841593272
* datePublished: 1958-06
* bookFormat -> Paperback
* author -> CAchebe
* publisher -> Heinemann

# CAchebe [Person]

* name: Chinua Achebe
* birthDate: 1930-11-16
* birthPlace -> Ogidi
* jobTitle: Novelist

# Heinemann [Organization]

* name: William Heinemann Ltd.
* foundingDate: 1930
* foundingLocation -> London
  * country -> UK
```

## Recursive Assertions Example

Assertions can have nested assertions:

```
# Boston [City]

* name: Boston
  * stateCode: MA
  * country -> USA

Keys to demonstrate qualified values:
* temperature: 25
  * unit: Celsius
  * measurementMethod -> InfraredThermometer
```

In the second example, the `temperature` property has two nested assertions:
- A property `unit` with value "Celsius"
- An edge `measurementMethod` pointing to an `InfraredThermometer` node

## Explicit IRIs

You can use explicit IRIs with angle brackets:

```
* <https://schema.org/name>: Chinua Achebe
```

## Quoted Values

String values can be explicitly quoted:

```
* name: "Things Fall Apart"
* description: "A novel about pre-colonial Igbo society"
```

Use quotes when values contain special characters or when you want to explicitly mark something as a string.

## Long Text Blocks

Onya Literate supports two mechanisms for handling long text blocks as property values:

### 1. Markdown Indented Text

Use Markdown's standard mechanism for multi-line list items. After the initial property line, add blank lines followed by indented paragraphs (4+ spaces) to continue the text within the same bullet point:

```
# CAchebe [Person]

* name: Chinua Achebe
* bio: Chinua Achebe (1930–2013) was a Nigerian writer considered a founder of modern African literature.

    Known for his novel Things Fall Apart and for writing about African life from an African perspective, his work focused on the effects of colonialism, political corruption, and the clash between traditional and Western values.

    After the Nigerian Civil War, he became an English professor in the United States before returning to Nigeria to continue his academic and writing career.
* birthDate: 1930-11-16
```

The indented paragraphs are treated as part of the same property value, with newlines preserved.

### 2. Text References

For longer text blocks or when you want to define text content separately from its usage, use text references with Python-style triple quotes:

```
# CAchebe [Person]

* name: Chinua Achebe
* bio:: achebe-bio  <!-- The double colon marks it as a text reference -->
* birthDate: 1930-11-16

:achebe-bio = """Chinua Achebe (1930–2013) was a Nigerian writer considered a founder of modern African literature, known for his novel Things Fall Apart and for writing about African life from an African perspective.

His work focused on the effects of colonialism, political corruption, and the clash between traditional and Western values, with works like Things Fall Apart and the "African Trilogy" exploring the Igbo experience. After the Nigerian Civil War, he became an English professor in the United States before returning to Nigeria to continue his academic and writing career.
"""
```

Text references:
- Use `::` after the property label to indicate a text reference
- Define the text content with `:reference-name = """content"""`
- Text references can be defined anywhere in the document, not necessarily before their usage
- Triple-quoted content preserves all whitespace and newlines exactly as written

## Optional assertion provenance (`@source`)

Some workflows want document-level provenance without making it part of the core model. The parser can optionally tag **every created assertion** (including nested assertions but excluding document header declarations) with a sub-property:

- `@source`: the `@document` IRI of the source document

Parsers will generally turn this **off by default** to avoid graph bloat.

## Model Summary

```
Graph
  └── Node (identified by IRI)
      ├── types: set[IRI]
      ├── properties: set[Property]
      └── edges: set[Edge]
      
Property (anonymous node: origin + label)
  ├── origin: Node | Property | Edge
  ├── label: IRI
  ├── value: str
  ├── properties: set[Property]
  └── edges: set[Edge]

Edge (anonymous node: origin + label)  
  ├── origin: Node | Property | Edge
  ├── label: IRI
  ├── target: Node
  ├── properties: set[Property]
  └── edges: set[Edge]
```

# Design Principles

1. **Simplicity**: Core model uses only nodes, edges, and properties
2. **IRI-based**: All identifiers are IRIs for global uniqueness
3. **String values only**: Keep the core model simple; add typing in layers above
4. **No pervasive ordering**: Use sets for assertions; ordering can be added when needed
5. **Recursive assertions**: Edges and properties are first-class, can have their own assertions
6. **Graph, not model**: The container is a "graph", elements within use "assertions" terminology

# Relationship to Other Models

Onya is similar to RDF but simpler:
- Similar: IRIs, triples (s-p-o), reification via recursive structure
- Simpler: No literals beyond strings, no blank nodes, uniform treatment of properties/edges
- Different: All assertions are "anonymous nodes", properties are always strings

The recursive assertion model is reminiscent of property graphs but more uniform:
- Similar: Nodes and edges both can have properties
- Different: Properties can also have edges, all via the same mechanism
